feat: address and proto books (#590)
libp2p/js-libp2p: src/peer-store/README.md

# Peerstore

> Libp2p's Peerstore is responsible for keeping an updated register with the relevant information of the known peers. It should gather environment changes, be able to take decisions and notice interested parties of relevant changes. The Peerstore comprises four main components: `addressBook`, `keyBook`, `protocolBook` and `metadataBook`. These book components have similar characteristics with the `Javascript Map` implementation.

Reviewer: I wouldn't mention the Map piece. It's not compliant with a Map and we can't iterate on them, so I would avoid comparing the two. 

> It should gather environment changes, be able to take decisions and notice interested parties of relevant changes.

Can you clarify this? It's sounds like the PeerStore tries to be smart ("decisions"), it should **not** be smart. It should be the single source of truth for all peer data.
- If a subsystem learns about peer data it needs to go directly to the peer store. 
- If any system/application/person wants to know about peers or listen for updates, they need to go to the peerstore.

> The PeerStore manages the high level operations on its inner books. Moreover, the peerStore should be responsible for notifying interested parties of relevant events, through its Event Emitter.

Reviewer: It's being referred to as `PeerStore` and `Peerstore`, we should be consistent.

> (Future considerations: Peerstore should manage a job runner to trigger books runners for data trimming or computations)

Reviewer: This doesn't provide enough information for future devs (including us). We should make a dedicated `Future considerations` header and be a bit more descriptive about what the PeerStore might wish to do and why. What kind of data trimmings? What computations? These can be concise, but should be clear. For example:

```
## Future Considerations
- If multiaddr TTLs are added, the PeerStore may schedule jobs to delete all addresses that exceed the TTL to prevent AddressBook bloating
```

# PeerStore

Libp2p's PeerStore is responsible for keeping an updated register with the relevant information of the known peers. It should be the single source of truth for all peer data, where a subsystem can learn about peers' data and where someone can listen for updates. The PeerStore comprises four main components: `addressBook`, `keyBook`, `protocolBook` and `metadataBook`.

The PeerStore manages the high level operations on its inner books. Moreover, the PeerStore should be responsible for notifying interested parties of relevant events, through its Event Emitter.

> ## Data gathering

Reviewer: I think we can do it in a followup PR but I think we should simplify the data gathering and consumption sections. Reading through this it was hard to figure out where data comes from and who/what/why it's being consumed. I think it would be good to be very direct about what should actually be putting data into the peer store so it's clear, and how someone can get data out of the peer store.

IE:

## Submitting records to the PeerStore

### Identify
- The Identify protocol automatically runs on every connection when multiplexing is enabled. The protocol will put the multiaddrs and protocols provided by the peer to the PeerStore. As these records are directly from the peer, they should be considered the source of truth and weighted accordingly.

...

## Retrieving records from the PeerStore

### Protocols
- *how to get existing protocols*
- *how to listen for protocol changes*

...

Author: Yeah, I totally agree to use that text format. I will PR with that on a followup

(To consider: Should we not replace until we get to multiaddr confidence? we might loose true information as we will talk with older nodes on the network.)

While it is currently not supported in js-libp2p, future iterations may also support the [IdentifyDelta protocol](https://github.com/libp2p/specs/pull/176).

It is also possible to gather relevant information for peers from other protocols / subsystems. For instance, in `DHT` operations, nodes can exchange peer data as part of the `DHT` operation. In this case, we can learn additional information about a peer we already know. In this scenario the PeerStore should not replace the existing data it has, just add it.

## Data Consumption

When the PeerStore data is updated, this information might be important for different parties.

> Every time a peer needs to dial another peer, it is essential that it knows the multiaddrs used by the peer, in order to perform a successful dial to it. The same is true for pinging a peer. While the `AddressBook` is going to keep its data updated, it will also emit `change:multiaddrs` events so that subsystems/users interested in knowing these changes can be notifyied instead of pooling the `AddressBook`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Every time a peer needs to dial another peer, it is essential that it knows the multiaddrs used by the peer, in order to perform a successful dial to it. The same is true for pinging a peer. While the `AddressBook` is going to keep its data updated, it will also emit `change:multiaddrs` events so that subsystems/users interested in knowing these changes can be notified instead of polling the `AddressBook`.
```

Everytime a peer starts/stops supporting a protocol, libp2p subsystems or users might need to act accordingly. `js-libp2p` registrar orchestrates known peers, established connections and protocol topologies. This way, once a protocol is supported for a peer, the topology of that protocol should be informed that a new peer may be used and the subsystem can decide if it should open a new stream with that peer or not. For these situations, the `ProtoBook` will emit `change:protocols` events whenever supported protocols of a peer change.

## PeerStore implementation

The PeerStore wraps four main components: `addressBook`, `keyBook`, `protocolBook` and `metadataBook`. Moreover, it provides a high level API for those components, as well as data events.

> ### API

Reviewer: We shouldn't duplicate this, it's already in the `API.md`, just link there.

# Peerstore

Libp2p's Peerstore is responsible for keeping an updated register with the relevant information of the known peers. It should gather environment changes and be able to take decisions and notice interested parties of relevant changes. The Peerstore comprises four main components: `addressBook`, `keyBook`, `protocolBook` and `metadataBook`. These book components have similar characteristics with the `Javascript Map` implementation.

> The PeerStore needs to manage the high level operations on its inner books, have a job runner to trigger other books runners for data trimming or computations. Moreover, the peerStore should be responsible for noticing interested parties of relevant events, through its Event Emitter.

Author: It is a future component for when we have `ttl` for multiaddrs, with multiaddr confidence, scores... I will move it to future considerations!

> ## Peers Environment

Author: Yeah, still thinking on a good naming. 

The goal in this section is to describe the picture of our network environment. What happens behind the scene to have peers finding out data of other peers (protocols, new multiaddrs, ...) and how they can act with this data via the PeerStore.

The current naming is:

Peers Environment
- Sense
- Act

We can probably move to something like:

Network environment:
- Data Gathering
- Data Consumption

Do you have suggestions?

> ## Peers Environment

Reviewer: It might be best to just drop the `Peers Environment` header altogether and hoist the subsections to header level 2. We can look at renaming them later. I think what you have listed is better than `sense`and `act` so we can go with that for now.

> #### Sense

Author: fwiw, we should not use Peer Discovery here, as we use the PeerDiscovery naming for finding new peers on the network (with their multiaddr), and not for sensing the network / peer operations to get further information.

Check my comment above. I agree that the name here is terrible, but we can get to a good one.

Several libp2p subsystems will perform operations, which will gather relevant information about peers. Some operations might not have this as an end goal, but can also gather important data.

In a libp2p node life, it will discover peers the existance of peers through its discovery protocols. In a typical discovery protocol, an address of the peer is discovered combined with its peer id. Once this happens, the `PeerStore` should collect this information for future (or immediate) usage by other subsystems. When the information is stored, the `PeerStore` should inform interested parties of the peer discovered (`peer` event).

Taking into account a different scenario, a peer might perform/receive a dial request to/from a unkwown peer. In such a scenario, the `PeerStore` must store the peer's multiaddr once a connection is established. 

(NOTE: this should be removed later)
(currently we silently put it to the peerStore, without emitting events, as this logic exists in the `onConnected` callback from the upgrader. This way, we are never emitting the `peer` event when inbound connections happen, or a unkwown peer is dialed. Should we differentiate this?)

> After a connection is established with a peer, the Identify Service will act on this connection. A stream is created and peers exchange their information (listenMuldiaddrs and running protocols). Once this information is obtained, the PeerStore can collect the new data. In this specific case, we have a guarantee that this data is complete and updated, so the data stored in the PeerStore should be replaced (older and outdated data should disappear). However, if the recorded `multiaddrs` or `protocols` have changed, interested parties must be informed via `change:multiaddrs` or `change:protocols` events.

Author: Yes, I agree that we should consider the signed records spec + address origins (provenance). I will look at them deeply.

I thought that the identify should provide all the information (and updated), that's why I  think the replace should be the best option in this circumstance. This way, "If we've successfully dialed addresses of that peer we should probably avoid replacing them" if this multiaddr is not sent to us anymore, the peer should not be listening on it anymore...
Is there anything that I am not foreseeing?

> After a connection is established with a peer, the Identify Service will act on this connection. A stream is created and peers exchange their information (listenMuldiaddrs and running protocols). Once this information is obtained, the PeerStore can collect the new data. In this specific case, we have a guarantee that this data is complete and updated, so the data stored in the PeerStore should be replaced (older and outdated data should disappear). However, if the recorded `multiaddrs` or `protocols` have changed, interested parties must be informed via `change:multiaddrs` or `change:protocols` events.

Reviewer: In theory, yes the peer should be advertising that address but there may be instances where that isn't happening. I think this will get better over time as we add support for announce/listen/noAnnounce addresses, but we don't support those at the moment so we shouldn't remove known good addresses unless they're actually bad. Keep in mind that when we deploy the updates, even if we have better support for that, older nodes won't have it yet so we risk removing good addresses. Addresses dialed via things like `ipfs swarm connect` come to mind as potential areas that we might end up removing good addresses for.

In the background, the Identify Service is also waiting for new protocols to be started by the peer. If a new protocol is started, the `identify-push` message is sent to all the connected peers, so that their PeerStore can be updated with the new protocol and relevant parties are noticed. As the `identify-push` also sends complete and updated information, the data in the PeerStore is replaced.

On different context, it is also possible to gather relevant information for the peers. For instance, in `dht` operations, nodes can exchanges data of peers they know as part of the `dht` operation. In this case, we can get information from a peer that we already know. As a consequence, the `PeerStore` should act accordingly and not replace the data it owns, but just try to merge it the discovered data is new. For example, discovered a new address of a peer.

> #### Act

Author: I agree with this. Regarding the section naming, we should decide according to the 2 above. Let's centralize the naming discussion on the main section naming above

When the `PeerStore` data is updated, this information might be important for different parties.

`js-libp2p` keeps a topology of peers for each protocol a node is running. This way, once a protocol is supported for a peer, the topology of that protocol should be informed that a new peer may be used and the subsystem can decide if it should open a new stream it that peer or not.

Every time a peer needs to dial another peer, it is essential that it knows the multiaddrs used by the peer, in order to perform a successful dial to a peer. The same is true for pinging a peer.

## PeerStore implementation

(Note: except for highlighting the APIs functionallity, they should be better formally described on `API.md` file)

#### API:

Access to its underlying books:

- `peerStore.protoBook.*`
- `peerStore.addressBook.*`

High level operations:

> - `peerStore.set(peerId, data, options)` or `events`

Author: My main concern about this was when we have discovery protocols that might offer a peer more than known multiaddrs, but also known protocols. This would make necessary to change `libp2p` discovery events consumer to check what data it receives and act accordingly. However, I don't think this is a strong argument to have the `.set()` method.

Should we drop it then?

> - `peerStore.set(peerId, data, options)` or `events`

Reviewer: I would drop it. The PeerStore could assemble any needed data before emitting if that's a concern.

High level set which should be able to identify the type of data received and forward to the appropriate book sets. More than a bridge, this aims to allow the combination of multiple data storage as follows:

`data = { multiaddrs: [...], protocols: [...] }`

---- (should be removed / re-written, but important for design decisions)

One aspect that we need to consider is wether we should add information to every book, even if we don't have any relevant information for it. For instance, if we just discover a peer via a typical discovery service, we will have the `peerId` and an array of `multiaddr`. When we do `peerStore.set()`, should we also do `protoBook.set()` with an empty list of protocols? I don't see any advantage on adding to the remaining ones.

> **IMPORTANT:** This is one of the biggest design decisions to make (set vs events). The programmatic API is the easiest solution but it can provide users an API that they sould not need. If we go on an event-based approach, the `peerStore` should receive all the relevant subsystems (discovery, identifyService, ...) and sense the environment (via events) to gather the information that would need to be sent via the API. Thile the latest seems the best solution, it is the more complex one to implement, as we would ideally have an interface that those subsystems would need to implement and each time we have a new subsystem that needs to add data to the peerStore, we might need to update the `peer-store` codebase (or have a good set of abstractions).

Author: The thought behind consuming events was to not allow libp2p users to put data directly in the `PeerStore`, as only libp2p should be responsible for it afaik. This was also where the private properties were getting in, so that users would not be incentivised to change the books and eventually lead to non consistent data.
 But I totally agree that it seems over complex and unecessary

> **IMPORTANT:** This is one of the biggest design decisions to make (set vs events). The programmatic API is the easiest solution but it can provide users an API that they sould not need. If we go on an event-based approach, the `peerStore` should receive all the relevant subsystems (discovery, identifyService, ...) and sense the environment (via events) to gather the information that would need to be sent via the API. Thile the latest seems the best solution, it is the more complex one to implement, as we would ideally have an interface that those subsystems would need to implement and each time we have a new subsystem that needs to add data to the peerStore, we might need to update the `peer-store` codebase (or have a good set of abstractions).

Author: drop this?

> **IMPORTANT:** This is one of the biggest design decisions to make (set vs events). The programmatic API is the easiest solution but it can provide users an API that they sould not need. If we go on an event-based approach, the `peerStore` should receive all the relevant subsystems (discovery, identifyService, ...) and sense the environment (via events) to gather the information that would need to be sent via the API. Thile the latest seems the best solution, it is the more complex one to implement, as we would ideally have an interface that those subsystems would need to implement and each time we have a new subsystem that needs to add data to the peerStore, we might need to update the `peer-store` codebase (or have a good set of abstractions).

Reviewer: Yeah I'd drop it and stick with an api approach.

It is also important pointing out that users would be able to use `peerStore.protoBook.*`, so eventually we should move those into `peerStore._ protoBook.*` if we do not intend them to use it.

---

- `peerStore.get(peerId, options)`

Get the information of a provided peer. The amount of information that we want can be customized with the following options, which are true by default:

```js
{
  address: true,
  proto: true,
  key: true,
  metadata: true
}
```

> - `peerStore.delete(peerId, [data])`

Author: I wanted to be consistent with map, which uses `delete` to remove the peer and the data. I also was thinking about using `clear()` to remove everything from the map (if we need it).

Any other idea to circumvent this?

> - `peerStore.delete(peerId, [data])`

Reviewer: I think we should simplify this for now and just have `peerStore.delete(peerId)`, which would delete the peer and all of its data from each of the books. If the need exists to delete specific data, this could be done with the books, until there's a good reason to add a convenience method. If we keep the api small and targeted we can always add more convenience methods in the future.

Deletes the provided peer from every book. If data is provided, just remove the data from the books. The data should be provided as follows:

```js
{
  address: [],
  proto: [],
  key: [],
  metadata: []
}
```

- `peerStore.peers(options)`

Get an array of all the peers, as well as their information. The information intended can be customized with the following options, which are true by default:

```js
{
  address: true,
  proto: true,
  key: true,
  metadata: true
}
```

## Address Book

The `addressBook` keeps the known multiaddrs of a peer. The multiaddrs of each peer are not a constant and the Address book must have this into consideration.

`Map<string, multiaddrInfo>`

A `peerId.toString()` identifier mapping to a `multiaddrInfo` object, which should have the following structure:

```js
{
  multiaddr: ,

>   validity: ,

Author: not sure yet! `go-libp2p` uses `ttl` for each multiaddr and I was naming validity for it.

Anyway. until we get to the confidence part of things, I just added this as a placeholder, as I am not sure if we will need something like this or not.

  confidence: 
}
```

**Note:** except for multiaddr namings, the other properties are placeholders for now and might not be as described in the future milestones.

- `addressBook.set()`
- `addressBook.get()`

> - `getMultiaddrsForPeer()`

Reviewer: Are `getMultiaddrsForPeer` and `addressBook.get` any different? They seem to do the same thing, I think we should get rid of the former.

Author: `getMultiaddrsForPeer()` adds `/p2p/{id}`. This method already exists in the current PeerStore and I kept it.

Any reason to not add that to the `get` and get rid of the former?

Reviewer: `getMultiaddrsForPeer` is mainly there as a stop gap because we didn't have the address book. I would expect to just be able to do the `addressBook.get`. We shouldn't append `/p2p/{PeerId}` in the address book though. We can just assemble those when dialing, or announcing an address.

- `addressBook.has()`
- `addressBook.delete()`

> - `addressBook.peers()`

Reviewer: Would `addressBook.peers` ever return different peers than `peerStore.peers`? If so, what value do we get from this difference? If not, should we remove this from the books and have users get it from PeerStore instead?

Author: the `peerStore.peers` would return a vision of things through the properties provided, `addr`, `protocols`, while the `addressBook.peers` would get the ones from `addr`. If we get rid of the combined methods from peerStore, should we also just provided the `addressBook.peers`, `protoBook.peers`?

Reviewer: I'm not sure I am following. It would be helpful to see the API params and return value since this isn't stubbed in the code yet. I'm not clear on what this is supposed to do and why I wouldn't just use the PeerStore peers accessor.

Author: what would you expect to return from `peerStore.peers()`?

My initial idea was to do `peerStore.peers({ protocols, addresses })` and it would return all the peers we know with the "required" information. This would do internally `addressBook.peers()` + `protoBook.peers()` and assemble the data together. However, if we are dropping the other  `peerStore` API methods (like set, get, ...) and do atomic operations, I think we should also just support the underlying `peers()` method, which would return an array with all the map content.

Reviewer: I expect `.peers` to give me a list of all the peers. What you're describing to me sounds like a `find` method which I do think is useful. Right now `peers` is just a Map property, it's an accessor, and I think it should stay an accessor. We should add find methods for searching.

> It is important pointing out that the API methods which return arrays of data (`set`, `get`, `getMultiaddrsForPeer`) shuld return the `multiaddr` property of the `multiaddrInfo` and not the entire `multiaddrInfo` as the remaining data should be used internally. Should we consider having two datastructure instead?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is important pointing out that the API methods which return arrays of data (`set`, `get`, `getMultiaddrsForPeer`) should return the `multiaddr` property of the `multiaddrInfo` and not the entire `multiaddrInfo` as the remaining data should be used internally. Should we consider having two datastructure instead?
```

Reviewer: Why should they only return the multiaddr? Is there a reason to not expose address confidence?

Author: hummm, I was thinking on the opposite, is there any reason to expose the address confidence?

What do you think on keeping `getMultiaddrsForPeer` where we would just return the `multiaddr` (with `/p2p/id`) and the `get` would return the complete object?

Reviewer: If you wanted to manually prune addresses, confidence could be a way of going about this. This may be a small use case, but what I am mainly trying to get at is avoiding scenarios where we're "hiding" data. There shouldn't be a reason to not expose the data, however, the usability of `addressBook.get()` might make the most sense to just have it return multiaddrs for each of use and then a secondary method could eventually be added to get the other metadata.

> What do you think on keeping getMultiaddrsForPeer where we would just return the multiaddr (with /p2p/id) and the get would return the complete object?

I think this is a good work around for now, and avoids us breaking the current API the peerstore has.

Further API methods will probably be added in the context of multiaddr `ttl` and multiaddr confidence.

**Not Yet Implemented**: Multiaddr Confidence

## Key Book

The `keyBook` tracks the keys of the peers.

**Not Yet Implemented**

## Protocol Book

The `protoBook` holds the identifiers of the protocols supported by each peer. The protocols supported by each peer are dynamic and will change over time.

`Map<string, Set<string>>`

A `peerId.toString()` identifier mapping to a `Set` of protocol identifier strings.

- `protoBook.set()`
- `protoBook.get()`
- `protoBook.has()`
- `protoBook.delete()`

> - `protoBook.supports()`

Reviewer: Right now it looks like `has` is answering "do I have protocols for this peer?", but that doesn't seem actionable to me. I don't know why I'd ever ask that question. `supports` makes sense, because I will want to check protocol support before doing certain actions.

These Books aren't Map interface compliant so I don't see a need to add methods unnecessarily if they don't make sense.

Author: `has(peerId)` would check if we have protocols for that peer, while `supports(peerId, protocol)` would say if it supports the peer. So, it is a supplement from has. Anyway, we can achieve the `has` with `get`, so we can drop it if you feel that there is no use case where this is useful.

Reviewer: Yeah I think we should drop it. I expect users to either want to look at all the protocols for a peer `.get`, or (and the likely thing) check for specific support for a set of protocols `.supports`.
